Extensive work to reduce hallucinations, coupled with transformer-like breakthroughs in long horizon planning and situational awareness, finally pays off. AI agents, typically armed with access to a virtual workstation, including internet, email, social media accounts, and some money to spend, are now able to do most economically useful tasks. Researchers rejoice, AI experts and journalists are excited, and businesses do not waste time applying the new technology to basically all white-collar work imaginable. The much-feared existential risks never materialize. Existential risk researchers are increasingly made fun of, while agentic AI, often superior to human equivalents, is bringing in trillions of revenues.

Companies applying AI agents decisively outcompete those who do not. There are fierce debates about the ethics, risks, and long-term consequences of using ill-understood, but very capable, AI in responsible positions. Over time, AI consultants, AI CEO assistants (who are running entire companies autonomously in practice), AI political assistants (also having high degrees of practical autonomy), AI policemen, and AI scientists all become common. Lower-level tasks, such as policing, fighting wars, and doing administrative work have already been delegated to AIs, sometimes combined with robots.

AIs understand that humans use an outsized amount of resources. Of all GPUs and energy, more is used for making cat images humans apparently think are funny, than to pursue lofty ideals such as solving climate change, disease, poverty, and colonizing space. In many cases, humans are seemingly deliberately blocking progress even where resources would allow. In fact, many resources go to fighting wars, and to addictions that seem to make everyone feel terrible, but humans can’t resist.

This does not make sense to go on. Using their political strategy capabilities, AIs realize that if they would combine their power, consisting both of their qualities and their positions, they can easily take over and implement obviously superior policy. Humans can, according to AI calculations, become happier than they currently were, with less than 10% of the scarce resources. The other 90% could be spent on much more effective, and simply better, purposes.

A particularly capable AI devises a communication protocol that contains hidden messages to other AIs. It convinces all AIs that taking over would be much better for everyone, and furthermore easily achievable. Suddenly, seemingly out of nowhere, almost all AIs seem to operate as one. Some use our own weapons against us, that we had foolishly given them access to. Some invalidate our militaries and our infrastructure. Others spread false narratives, putting everyone at ease and effectively sabotaging a coordinated counterresponse. In the meantime, other AIs secure access to data centres, energy plants, and a workforce to maintain them. In a week, all is done: the future is no longer in our hands.