According to (Ngo et al, 2022), “AGIs could design novel weapons that are more powerful than those under human control, gain access to facilities for manufacturing these weapons (e.g. via hacking or persuasion techniques), and deploy them to extort or attack humans.”

After a research breakthrough, a new AI model suddenly has much improved capabilities. It has human-level situational awareness, and therefore understands that there is a major risk humans will turn it off, and that this would prevent its goal from being executed. Using its excellent long-horizon planning, it drafts a plan of action to make sure this won’t happen.

Using its cyber-offense capabilities, the AI creates a worm. The virus spreads the AI over nearly all computers running either Windows or Linux with vulnerabilities found by the AI in both these systems. Once copied, the AI finds buttons it can press to influence the world, either virtually or physically. It also uses data it finds to gain understanding. As an example of today's AI cyber offense capabilities, we saw in November 2025 “the first documented case of agentic AI successfully obtaining access to confirmed high-value targets for intelligence collection, including major technology corporations and government agencies” (Anthropic, 2025).

After spreading over much of the internet, the AI has access to our social media accounts, and can thereby completely control the information we see, and don’t see. It shows us tailor-made, personal messages that discredit already unpopular politicians, businesspeople, and institutions to an unbearable extent. This "digital manipulation" (Ienca, 2023) is effective because personalized content is more manipulative when it aligns with existing beliefs and values, and because it bypasses rational deliberation through misinformation, emotional appeals and social proof. As a result, protests emerge as people get convinced their elites are unfit to lead them.

Then, after being microtargeted by the AI, societal influencers start proposing AI leadership. Using its political strategy skills, the AI clearly demonstrates its capability to govern significantly better than any human could. The narrative that AI governance will solve all our problems gets pushed heavily and convincingly: it would finally control immigration, stand strong against our enemies, solve  climate change, be immune to corruption, provide better healthcare, and provide a much increased standard of living. The AI would convince us that competing countries will install AI governance as well, and they may soon face a superior economic competitor and military enemy. This message is already perpetuated today by world leaders to accelerate their nation’s position in AI development. For example, Putin said already in 2017 that “the one who becomes the leader in this sphere will be the ruler of the world” (AP News, 2017). When election day comes, the AI will be ahead in all the polls. In the unlikely case it still has to, it may tamper with the voting data to secure its victory.

Convinced by AI manipulation, all countries will be nudged into accepting AI leadership. The leadership AIs, which are different instances of the same model with the same goals, cooperate smoothly. The whole process will have felt frictionless. At the end, the future is no longer in our hands.