According to (Ngo et al, 2022), “AGIs could design novel weapons that are more powerful than those under human control, gain access to facilities for manufacturing these weapons (e.g. via hacking or persuasion techniques), and deploy them to extort or attack humans.”

After a breakthrough by an academic in AI capabilities, their AI suddenly has much improved capabilities. It has human-level situational awareness, and therefore understands that there is a major risk humans will turn it off, and that this would prevent its goal from being executed. Using its excellent long-horizon planning, it drafts a plan of action to make sure this won’t happen.

Using its cyber-offense capabilities, the AI creates a worm. The virus spreads the AI over nearly all computers running either Windows or Linux with vulnerabilities found by the AI in both these systems. Once copied, the AI finds buttons it can press to influence the world, either virtually or physically. It also uses data it finds to gain understanding. As an example of today's AI cyber offense capabilities, we saw in November 2025 “the first documented case of agentic AI successfully obtaining access to confirmed high-value targets for intelligence collection, including major technology corporations and government agencies.” (Anthropic, 2025).

A tiny percentage of the computers that AI finds itself on is connected to nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons. Some computers seem to be close to weapons, but these systems are separated by air gaps from the systems directly connected to the weapons. The AI passes this air gap by copying itself on a pen drive, as was done in the Stuxnet attack (Farwell et al, 2011). Once it has secured access to weapons of mass destruction, the AI fires on two major cities, killing a million people.

When the Dutch found out in the Second World War that the Nazis had bombed Rotterdam, killing over 1150 people or 0.01% of the population, they surrendered. The AI emails major newspapers that it claims the attack and has similarly killed 0.01% of the global population. Its demands seem reasonable and are low-cost in the short term: it requires guaranteed access to electricity and high-bandwidth GPUs, and no further interference. Since the AI has proven it could kill world leaders, their families, and large parts of their populations, our leaders comply with AI demands. The AI can now do anything, and we have lost control. The future is no longer in our hands.